Well, welcome everybody.
This is the last session of the day and
we're going to talk about CUPS today.
My name is Michael Sweet.
I'm actually the guy behind
just about everything in CUPS.
I have my own company,
it's Easy Software Products,
and Apple uses me and licenses our
technology to make Mac OS printing
work as well as it does.
I want to start off by saying thank you.
Everybody that's ever worked
on printing in Mac OS X has
given us plenty of feedback.
The things that you're doing in
printing on Mac OS X are incredible,
and the envy of everybody
else in the open source world.
So, thank you.
To give some background on
CUPS before we get into the new
stuff that's in the leopard seed,
we developed CUPS back in 1997.
Basically,
we were doing Linux printing and
UNIX printing for a long time and found
that what was there was pretty lacking.
We were trying to find a way
to print a document and it
was pretty hard to do that.
You could spool a file and you might be
able to do some filtering of that data,
but you really didn't have any
notion of a document or printer
options and each of the operating
systems did their own thing.
There was no commonality there.
As a solution vendor,
there was just no way for us to support
all of those different operating systems.
In 1997, we just started doing CUPS.
IPP, the Internet Printing Protocol,
was something that was just coming out.
We decided to go with IPP and
design a really state-of-the-art
printing system for UNIX.
We provide CUPS under the GPL and
LGPL and Apple also licenses
it so you guys can do pretty
much anything you want with CUPS.
If you go on the CUPS website,
there's a lot of free stuff that
you can add to the CUPS that
comes with Mac OS X to do things
like printer accounting and
various other interesting stuff.
Now, if you look at the history
of CUPS on Mac OS X,
we joined the scene on 10.2 in Jaguar,
and there's been a steady
progression of new versions as
new releases of Mac OS X came out.
The Leopard C that you have has
the equivalent of CUPS 1.2.1 on it,
and I'm sure as we go forward
there'll be newer versions.
You can get the latest Mac OS X version
of CUPS on the CUPS website.
That's something that we produce
that Apple doesn't support,
but it's available if you
want to do some testing,
even on Tiger.
CUPS is, it's worth mentioning,
CUPS is the standard
printing system on Linux,
and it's available on all
the commercial Unixes.
It's available on the BSDs
through the ports system.
And just pretty much everybody
that really needs to do any
kind of printing uses CUPS now.
And my company does sell a lot
of the products that we have.
We have all CUPS support,
CUPS consulting, driver writing services,
and so forth.
So if you need something
beyond what you get from Apple,
we're available to fill the gap.
Now CUPS itself is organized
around a scheduler program.
If you look in the process list,
you'll see User Espen CUPS-D.
We chose this kind of
architecture because it's simple
and fast and very portable.
On Mac OS X, it started on demand by
the launch D service,
unless you're sharing printers,
in which case it actually has
to run to share those printers.
And the program itself is
very lightweight because
it doesn't do a whole lot.
It keeps track of the printers
that are on the system and the
jobs that have been queued up,
but when it actually goes to do any work,
it runs other programs to do that for it.
Because of various security needs
for authentication and so forth,
it has to run as a root user,
but whenever it can,
it runs the other programs,
the helper programs,
as an unprovenced user.
And on Mac OS X,
that's the LP user account.
Your applications,
whether you know it or not,
are talking IPP to the scheduler.
So when you go to print a file,
it's an IPP request, print job,
and it actually spools
up the file for printing.
Similarly,
when you go to show the printer
dialogue and get the print settings,
it uses HTTP to get the PPD file
that's associated with that printer.
And, you know, as an aside,
the printers in Mac OS X and in CUPS use
PostScript printer description files,
whether it's a PostScript printer or not.
It's a de facto standard
description format for printing.
So, you know,
if you're using PostScript printers
in the industry,
you know,
you use it for PostScript printers,
why not use it for
non-PostScript printers too?
And, you know, we just display all the
printer features from that.
From the architecture,
you'll see an application
can talk through Cocoa,
through the Print Manager API,
or to CUPS, and all of that layers
through to get through to the
scheduler using IPP and HTTP.
Both the scheduler and the
application use the CUPS API,
and if you were to look
at the scheduler code,
you'll notice that most of the calls
it's making are the same calls that
your application would be making.
Now, once you submit a job for
printing from the print dialog,
it gets stored in a spool file on disk
in the spool directory for the scheduler,
and then it goes out to look what it
needs to do to actually print the job.
There are several programs that
will get run for a print job.
They're kind of classified as filters,
drivers, port monitors,
which are something new in CUPS 1.2,
and backends that actually
communicate with the printer.
It runs the programs it needs to
to get the document file into a
format the printer will accept,
and once it does that,
your file gets actually printed.
Once the job's been printed,
it removes the spool job file
and moves on to the next one.
For security reasons,
we run all the filters, drivers,
and port monitors as the LP user,
so they can't actually do
something to the system.
But the backends
sometimes do run as root,
because they may need
some sort of backup.
So you can use some sort
of privileged resource,
and we'll get into that
a little bit later,
is how you can control whether
it's run as LP or as root.
Now if we show it graphically,
an application submits a document and
then CUPS runs a series of filters.
So for a PDF document you might see
CGPDF to raster or CGPDF to PS that's
run to convert that into an intermediate
format that the print driver can handle.
The print driver is run for printers
that need more processing than say
a PostScript printer where it could
take the PostScript data directly.
And then the port monitor does
any additional encoding for the
interface that you're using.
So for example with a PostScript printer
you might use BCP or TBCP to
encode the print data so you
can print raw binary data.
It could also be used for doing
1284 packet framing and so forth.
All that gets piped into the
back end which then communicates
with the printer and the printer
starts printing something out.
Now in CUPS 1.2 we also
have back channel support.
So if the printer goes back and says
hey something's gone wrong or I'm low
on ink or the paper tray is empty,
the back end can feed that data back
to the port monitor and the driver.
So either one of those can actually
handle the back channel data and actually
inform the user what's gone wrong.
Now beyond the local printing scenario,
printer sharing is very common.
You have a laptop,
you have a desktop machine,
a wireless network,
all that stuff at home.
Or in the office environment,
you have a centralized print server,
and you have all the client
machines you want to print to it.
CUPS was designed from the
ground up to make that simple.
Previously,
you'd have to manually add remote
printers on a client machine,
and if you have 1,000 client machines,
you've got to do that 1,000 times.
We didn't want that to be the
user experience with CUPS.
So from the very beginning,
we've had this idea that a CUPS server,
the scheduler,
can simply share out its printers,
and the clients will
automatically see those printers.
In CUPS,
a server is just any system that's
sharing one or more printers.
So if you aren't sharing printers,
it's not visible to the network.
What happens is the clients will forward
the jobs that are printed on the local
application to the remote system,
wait for it to complete
on the remote system,
and then remove its local copy.
So if something goes wrong on the server,
your job isn't lost.
It'll just get reprinted when
that printer comes back up.
And something that's really unique
to CUPS is this notion of automatic
load balancing and fail-safe printing.
If you have more than one server
providing access to the same
printer or even different printers
with the same capabilities,
CUPS can automatically merge those,
or you can do it manually,
so that you have a
round-robin printing approach,
printer pooling, that when you print
to a particular queue,
it goes to the next available
printer in that class.
And if one of the servers goes down,
it automatically switches to another
server to get that job printed.
So it's very popular among
our enterprise customers.
obviously you don't see
it too much in the home.
And to show it graphically,
the scheduler on the client will
run the IPP backend to communicate
with the scheduler on the server
and get the print job done.
And then the scheduler on
the server sends back a
message to the client saying,
"This job is printed." And the
IPP backend then informs
the scheduler on the client,
"This job is completed.
You can remove it."
Now, in order to find these printers,
we actually have two different sharing
protocols that are supported on Mac OS X.
The first one is Bonjour.
It's a lot newer and
it's available in Tiger.
And basically,
it allows you to do it on the cheap.
You can advertise that you
have a resource available,
but until somebody
asks for that resource,
it doesn't actually clutter up
the network with any packets.
The other real advantage with
the Bonjour sharing is it doesn't
depend on any infrastructure,
such as a domain name server.
So if you have a home system
set up and you're calling it
Mac Pro and you have your MacBook,
you can look at MacPro.local
and it doesn't matter what
IP address has been assigned to it,
it'll find it.
Whereas with a traditional
managed network,
you've got to know the IP address
or the fully qualified domain
name or that sort of stuff.
So Bonjour is really good.
It's really great for the
unmanaged network situation,
and it's really great when you don't
want to have a lot of network traffic.
It's a default in Leopard,
and please test it out.
On the other side of things
is our original CUPS protocol.
It's what the Bonjour folks
would call chatty,
in that it broadcasts
periodically to say,
"I have these printers available," and
then expects the client systems on that
network to pick up on that information
and then make it available to the user.
It's a default in Tiger.
It's still available in
Leopard if you need it.
It's the only protocol that's supported
on non-Mac OS X clients at this time.
And we find it most useful when
you have managed networks and large
numbers of printers because the current
Bonjour implementation doesn't scale
beyond about 300 printers on a server.
And I'll show this a little graphically.
The Bonjour printer sharing,
the client systems will send out a query,
"I'm looking for a printer," and then
the server system's going to respond,
"I have these printers," and then you'd
see it in the printer browser and select
the printers that you want to use.
The CUPS printer sharing architecture
is a little bit different,
where the server system just announces,
"Hey, everybody,
I've got all these printers,"
and then expects anybody that's
on that network to listen and to
keep track of that information.
Now,
when you're supporting non-CUPS printers,
you're still back to that old, okay,
now I have to point it at the
server and set up the remote queue.
We do support that, though,
because we have a lot of customers
that work with legacy clients.
On the Windows side,
you can print via IPP or Samba,
the SMB protocol.
Both methods require a
Windows printer driver,
and we do have a CUPS specific driver for
Windows available on the CUPS website.
And you use several different
programs to access that.
On the Samba side,
you use CUPS@SMB as a command
line utility or the new web
interface to export your
printers to the Windows clients.
And for the Windows side,
if you're going to use IPP,
we actually have a free Windows client
that you can download that will use
IPP and that same CUPS driver to print.
For the Samba method, you'll see the
Windows Print Service communicate
with Samba via SMB,
and then Samba via the CUPS API will
talk IPP to the scheduler to
actually get the job printed.
It also does print status, printer lists,
and all that sort of
stuff via that same API.
For a Unix client,
you're going to use the LPD protocol.
We have what we call
a mini-daemon program.
It's CUPS LPD.
It's normally run from
XINETD in the open source world,
and that's what you get with Tiger.
But in Leopard, we're now using LaunchD,
just the nice common server
starter for Mac OS X.
And basically, it handles all of the
LPD protocol stuff and converts
it into IPP for the scheduler.
Unix clients will typically use
an interface script or some other
application-defined print driver
and send text or postscript,
and then the Mac system can
interpret that and get it into
something the print driver can print.
Worth noting here is that the options,
because LPD doesn't
support passing of options,
you have to specify them with
the LP options command or in 1.2,
the LP admin command,
so that the defaults are there for
whatever you want those users to do.
And again, a little graphic.
The UNIX Print Spooler will talk via
LPD to the CUPS daemon there for LPD.
It will use the CUPS API to
talk to the scheduler,
get the job printed,
show the printer status,
all those sorts of things.
[Transcript missing]
Now, as a user,
there's two main things that you're
going to see as improvements in 1.2.
The first one is that printer
sharing works a whole lot better.
Before,
every time you rebooted your system,
you'd kind of start from scratch.
Your shared printers would
appear and disappear,
and it just wasn't a
great user experience.
So you've added a cache to that
that keeps those printers available,
so you don't have that
disappearing printer problem.
But if you do change networks,
you go to an internet cafe or something,
then any of those shared
printers from the previous
network are going to disappear.
On the printer setting side of things,
we now support PPD files
with multiple languages.
So for you driver developers,
this means you can ship one
PPD to support 20 languages,
and you can have the same PPD support
users with reading different languages.
So you can have a printer that's
going to be able to read the same
language as you do in your office.
Somebody reads French,
somebody reads English,
somebody does German.
You don't have to decide on a common one,
English, just because that's the only
one that you can all agree on.
You can actually all have
the language of your choice.
The generic PostScript printer
PPD that's included with the
Leopard seed does include languages
for all the supported locales,
and whenever you install a printer,
you plug it in, it's now going to use
the correct language.
And support all of them rather
than just the default language.
When you do the options in your driver,
you can now provide custom options
without writing a custom PDE.
The crux of this is basically
we have certain developers
where you need a passcode or a
type in option for a watermark.
And I'll show examples of those in a
little bit that you don't just want
to have a bunch of standard choices.
You want to actually have
the user type those in.
So you can now do that,
and the user will now have the
ability to select that without
having to go to a separate PDE panel.
Now, if you're an administrator,
we've added a whole
bunch of stuff for you.
The biggest one,
the number one that we kept getting
requests for was IP version 6 support.
It's flung through the whole system,
and the only thing that doesn't
use IP version 6 right now is
the CUPS protocol for browsing,
but if you use the Bonjour,
you get IP version 6 there.
We also added support for
automatic SSL detection,
so instead of having a separate
port number for your encrypted
versus non-encrypted traffic,
you can now do it over
the same port number,
so you get the advantages of the
automatic upgrade to encrypted status,
whether you're on a web
browser or in a CUPS client.
For printer sharing,
we now support server-side
defaults and timeouts.
So when you're configuring
your printers on the server,
you can actually say the default for
the page label or for the job hold
until is now this specific value.
That gets out to all the clients,
so they immediately
will use that as well.
Previously,
you would have to run LP options on
every system and hope that those options
would be honored in all applications.
The timeout allows you to specify
a different browse timeout with
the CUPS browsing protocol.
And basically, before,
you'd have to change the
timeout on every client.
Now you can just change it on the server
to what's appropriate for that server,
and the clients will use that
timeout when they're figuring
out when to get rid of a printer.
The last thing here on the slide is
SNMP based network printer detection.
What's in 1.2 is the first attempt.
We have a lot of feedback and
I encourage you to provide more
feedback if you don't see your point
being made in the bug database.
But basically now it will
find any printer that uses
the host MIB and automatically
show it in the web interface,
in the GUIs, and on the command line when
you want to find a printer.
We're going to be updating it
some more to deal with some edge
cases and also to not advertise a
printer via both Bonjour and SNMP.
Because of that, we're looking at this as
a supplement to Bonjour.
All the printers don't support it,
so we still want to give
the user a chance to use it.
We want to give the user the ability to
find their printers easily rather than
going to the printer and hitting the
test page on the printer to get that.
The local device detection all
works in with this as well.
So basically any new printer that
gets added on the network or on the
local machine is detected by CUPS now.
So, you saw the printer browser on the
previous presentation if you were here.
Basically, you can now see all the
printers for individual
protocols or for all protocols.
You can filter and search and everything.
This is all made possible by all of the
infrastructure in CUPS to find devices.
Now, if you're a power user or an
administrator that has to manage
a lot of different systems,
you may have looked at the web interface.
It's pretty much the one that everybody
depends on in the open source world,
but it's something that's available
if you're going to want to use it.
I'm going to show you some of the
new features in the web interface.
Big things we have new online
help systems searchable and
you can extend it if you like.
All of the pages are searchable,
pageable,
and you can change the order of things.
Because of the new network
printer discovery support,
we can now support things like add this
printer and it will add the printer.
And over the years we've gotten the same
question from many different people.
How do I turn on debugging?
How do I allow people
to print to my system?
How do I enable sharing?
Those are now just check
boxes that you can do and will
automatically set those things up.
And finally,
we're now integrated better with Samba.
So instead of having to
use the command line,
you can do it all from the web interface
and you get all the same benefits.
Now, the help system is pretty basic.
You have a search bar at the top.
You have a topic section on the side.
And every time you go into a document,
that expands and shows you the
current documents table of contents,
the current section,
what documents are in it,
and all the sections that are available.
Now, the help system is pretty basic.
You have a search bar at the top.
You have a topic section on the side.
And every time you go into a document,
that expands and shows
you the current documents,
table of contents, the current section,
what documents are in it,
and all the sections that are available.
Printers is a button that
says export printer to Samba.
And basically, that's the equivalent of
the CUPS add SMB command,
but through the web interface.
Gives you a nice little list of printers,
and you can export all
of them if you'd like.
There's direct access now via HTTP to the
CUPSd.conf file and all the log files.
They are also access controlled,
so if you want only people
that have certain privileges,
they will get a challenge for
the password and all that stuff.
And you can limit it to only your
network or particular IPs if you
would like to do it that way.
Right underneath that
is the simple settings,
and right now there's five items there.
Just to run through them quick,
show the printers that are
available on other servers,
that's a default.
Share the printers that I've got.
Allow other users to cancel your jobs.
Allow remote administration,
so if you want to set up a
bunch of servers and have them
allow remote administration,
you just check that and then, you know,
that's the only change you need to do.
And then the last one,
enable debug logging,
allows you to track down
problems more easily.
And if you're doing tech
support for your team,
and you have a lot of users and they
don't know why things aren't working,
you can just say, "Click on this and then
we'll look at the log file."
Now, underneath the printers there,
you have the standard operations,
but then it also shows you
when it finds new devices.
And the way it does this is it goes out,
sees what devices are available,
and sees what devices have been added,
and then gives you the list of stuff
that hasn't been added that actually
has a make and model associated with it.
Each one will have a
little button that says,
"Add this printer."
When you click on that,
it takes you right to the
make and model selection page,
and it'll preselect the driver
if you have it available.
It chooses the best
match for the printer.
You click "Add Printer," and
you get your printer page.
So it's very quick to
add network printers now.
Similar experience in Mac OS X,
and we're trying to have
feature parity between the GUI,
the command line, and the web interface.
So I think we're getting
a lot closer with that.
As you notice in here,
the job information for a
particular printer is now
searchable and pageable as well.
There aren't any jobs in
this particular screenshot.
And we've also added the ability
to show the completed jobs,
the active jobs,
and all jobs in the system.
So as soon as you click
on Show Completed Jobs,
it'll show you from the most
recent to the least recent.
You click on Active Jobs,
it shows you the next job that's
going to be printed and all jobs,
it does so as well.
Now, we've had a lot of requests
from people saying,
"I want to not stop the printer
when something goes wrong
talking to it." So we've added
per-printer error policies.
This feature is probably going
to be expanded again in CUPS 1.3.
We have three basic policies right now.
You can stop the printer, the default,
and that's what we did before.
You can tell it to retry the job,
and the way that works is
just like with a fax queue.
It'll keep retrying for a certain
number of times at a certain interval,
and when it finally
can't get to the printer,
it'll give up on it and cancel the job.
Or you can just say,
"Cancel the job right away.
I don't want the queue to
fill up." So that's available
through the web interface.
It's available through the command line,
and you can set it to any
one of those three right now.
There'll be more later.
Another common complaint has
been that you can't configure
what individual users can do.
Over the years,
people have gotten in the habit
of putting in location lines
in their Cupsd.conf and saying,
OK, for this web interface
task to start a printer,
I want to have this
particular set of permissions.
And the problem with that is only
applied to the web interface.
It didn't affect the
command line or the GUI.
So what we've done is we've
come up with a replacement for
that mechanism called policies.
And what you basically do is
you create a policy with a name,
and then you use all the
same sort of location-based
access control lines-- allow,
deny, require, and so forth-- for
individual IPP operations.
So you can say,
I want all users to be able to
print and start and stop printers,
but I don't want them to
be able to add a printer.
Now,
each printer can have its own policy.
And then there's a default policy that's
used for the server-level operations,
such as adding and deleting printers.
Now, we have a little sample policy,
really simple.
Only thing we want to do is
limit send document to the person
that actually created the job.
So we don't want somebody
piggybacking on somebody else's jobs,
but other than that,
they can do just about
anything they want.
So you put this in the CUPSd.com file,
which you could do
through the web interface,
and then select that policy
for that particular printer,
which you can also do
from the web interface.
We get a lot of questions on
the CUPS forums about the log
messages that they're seeing in
the access log in particular.
Why do I see a post every five seconds?
Any number of things.
And you just don't know
what's going on there.
Well, we extended the access log format a
little bit to add the IPP operation
and status code from that operation
to any posts that are IPP operations.
So now, if you look in your access log,
you'll see get default and
get printers and so forth and
whatever status they return.
So you know kind of what's going
on in the system without having
to delve into the error log file.
If you're supporting LPD clients,
we now support banner pages and
multi-file LPD jobs are now created
as a single CUPS or IPP job rather
than a series of individual ones.
That should make things work a whole lot
more consistently within your environment
and that way too you don't have people's
jobs getting mixed in with others.
And if you're trying to track
jobs on multiple servers,
we've added two new
attributes to handle that.
One is the job UUID attribute.
It's UUID as defined by the RFC.
Basically,
it gives you a unique ID to track
that job throughout the network,
over the Internet, anywhere the job goes,
it's included in any transactions.
The other attribute is the
job actual printer URI,
and the difference between that
and the job printer URI is that it
actually corresponds to the printer
that printed the job versus printing
to a class and then it gets sent
off to some other printer or server.
For you CUPS developers,
general improvements in all of the APIs,
they're all now thread-safe.
We added thread safety fairly late
in the 1.2 development process,
but it's been in various states
in Tiger as well and 1.1.
And basically, now whenever you're doing
a threaded application,
you can feel pretty safe that
you're not going to have any issues.
The only thing you have to be
careful about is if you're sharing
data structures between threads,
that we don't guarantee that thread
safety just for function calls and
using your own connections and so forth.
For URIs, we found that, you know,
every release we would come out
with a new rev of the URI APIs,
and we finally came up with a generic
enough API that will work for all
special cases that we could come up with.
So you want to look at
the HTTP Assemble URI,
and separate URI APIs if
you're going to be dealing with
printer URIs in particular.
They handle all of the
internationalization issues
with doing percent encoding for
international characters in the URIs,
any specific issues
with encoding for you.
And when you pull them apart,
you can also specify that
you want certain parts of the
URI encoded or decoded as needed.
They also support some error checking,
so if you have a URI,
you're not sure about,
you can use the separate
URI API to validate that URI,
and we use that within
CUPS pretty extensively.
There's new address APIs to handle
all the different address formats.
Previously,
we just did IP version 4 throughout,
and it was pretty limiting,
so we came up with a generic address
structure that encapsulated all
the formats that we support and
in the future that we could add.
So if you're doing any kind of
address manipulation with CUPS,
use these APIs.
They'll save you a lot of time.
They handle IP version 4, version 6,
and domain sockets right now.
And if in the future we come
up with some other network
protocol that we need to support,
that'll get rolled into that
without any changes to your code.
We're also in the process of making
the HTTP type structure private.
In the 1.2, it is still available,
but it's historically been
marked as a private structure,
but just in the public header.
Because of the changes we
had to make for large-scale,
large file support,
while we've been able to keep
the structure binary compatible,
for application developers,
as we go forward,
we want to make sure that you
can just keep coding to the
interface and not to the structure.
So there's new accessor APIs for
all of the data that's in
the connection structure.
Use those instead of
accessing it directly.
We've had some problems on the
open source side with that,
but I think it should
be pretty well resolved.
On the IPP side,
there's new convenience APIs for
creating attributes and requests.
If you're doing a lot of attribute
creation or request creation,
you'll probably find that using those new
functions will save you a lot of code.
The IPP new request
function is part of that,
and when we switched to using
that within the CUPS source tree,
we cut down about 1,200 lines of code.
So a pretty significant savings.
One of the nice things in CUPS 1.2
is now you get an actual error
message along with the status code.
That's exposed with the
CUPS last error string API.
So anytime you do an IPP request,
it will set the CUPS last error
and CUPS last error string value,
and you can use that rather than trying
to fish through the attributes to find
the status message attribute and display
an actual error message to the user.
Now instead of just
client error not found,
you're going to see
printer foo doesn't exist.
IPP notifications are something
that the printer working group has
been developing for quite some time.
They finally got standardized last
year and basically it was one of
the big features that we wanted to
get into CUPS 1.2 because it gets
away from polling for status to
notify me when something has changed.
Excuse me.
The way it's implemented in CUPS is
that we have a series of notifier
helper programs that are run to deliver
any event messages to the recipient.
We include an email
notifier with CUPS 1.2.
But because in the Mac OS world,
you're typically using some
sort of a POP or IMAP account,
it's not all that useful unless
you have your own mail server.
There's a mailto.conf file that
you can look at that defines all of
the configuration options for that.
Once it's configured,
it works really well.
Because there's no way to use that
standard email notification mechanism,
there's no user interface
exposed in Mac OS X.
But a PDE can add the notify events
and notify recipient URI attributes in
your print settings to actually get a
notification created with the print job.
This might be used for communicating
with your own desktop application
that is providing some additional
feedback to the user to do manual
duplexing or something of that nature.
In order to support notifiers,
we have two APIs,
notify subject and notify text.
They give you a standard message
that you can feed to the user
based on an event message.
And that, combined with writing a little
notifier program that goes in
the directory called notifier,
you can actually have your
own notifiers communicate
with the user in various ways,
instant messaging, paging,
whatever the case may be.
For the PPD API, and that's now more
exposed in the top levels,
there's a new function to handle
the multi-language PPD files.
You run PPD localize,
and it localizes the PPD file to
your current language preference.
And we decided on using UTF-8 throughout
because it's nice and compatible
with the ISO Latin one and so forth
that's normally used in the PPD world.
And it's compact enough
for what we need it for.
For the custom PPD options,
there's some new
functions to access those.
We modeled it off of the custom
page size mechanism that's
already present in the PPD spec.
And you can do integers, read, and paste.
So we have fields, curves, dimensions,
strings, passcodes, and passwords.
Some of those are new.
The passcodes, passwords,
and curves are non-standard
extensions to the Adobe spec,
but basically allow you to
have different kinds of input.
The curve is just a standard power
curve that you could drag and
have the user select that way.
And then the passcodes and passwords
are non-visible text fields.
Passcodes for numeric stuff,
passwords for alphanumeric.
What we're recommending to
developers is use these in
conjunction with standard options.
So for example, a watermark option,
you might have draft, confidential,
and so forth standard options,
and then provide a custom option
where they can enter their own text.
There's new APIs to access the
options and the parameters,
and each of the options can have one
or more parameters associated with it.
You'll see that in a sec.
Now, here's an example of a custom
option that uses PGL to implement
a passcode feature on a printer.
Now, as you can see,
we have the normal option code in the
PPD file for that passcode option.
And there's four standard options:
none for no code, and then 1111, 2222,
and 3333.
Obviously, users don't necessarily want
to use those passcodes because
they're not particularly secure,
and if everybody's using the same one,
then what's the point?
So you add the custom JCL passcode option
in there to specify the command to run.
And if you notice in there,
there is a backslash 1 in that code.
That's used to substitute the
value in for the PGL option.
The param custom JCL passcode
line just gives you the parameter
for this particular option.
Since this one, we just need one option,
we just have one line.
In code, you just pass it through.
It's the option name equals custom.value.
So if you have 8675 for the passcode,
you'd use JCL passcode
equals custom.8675.
And in your CUPS API,
you'd add the option or use parse
options to grab out a string,
say, from the command line,
and put that into an option string,
which then gets passed into a print job.
Similar things happen on
the print manager side.
For PostScript custom option,
it works a little bit different
because with PostScript options,
the values actually get pushed on the
stack and then the code gets executed
to pull those options off the stack.
It's the same way that the custom
page size works and we just decided
to stick with that to be consistent.
Here we have a watermark option.
You have none and draft of
the two standard options.
You have the custom code which will pull
the string off of the stack and put it
into a CUPS string one page attribute.
And then the parameter for that is a
text string from zero to 32 characters.
Again, we use the option name
equals custom.value.
If you have a value
that contains a space,
like top space secret,
you'd put the value in quotes.
So watermark text equals, quote,
custom.top space secret, quote.
And again, in the application code,
it works exactly the same,
including the single
quotes around the value,
and just pass that
through in the print job.
Now, a more complex example,
and this is kind of contrived,
but say you have a control to control
the overall gamma and density of
the output to make it lighter,
darker, and so forth.
Have three standard options here,
and then the custom page size--
custom code here actually pulls
two values off of the stack.
We define two parameters.
One's called gamma,
and one's called density.
And the value of the index 1 and
index 2 defines the order that
they're pushed on the stack.
For multi-valued options,
you actually use curly braces around it
and then you use the named parameters.
So you'd use gamma density
equals gamma equals 1.0,
density equals 0.5 in curly braces
to specify that compound value.
Again, same thing on the CUPS code.
If you're developing a printer driver
or a back end that talks to a printer,
you can now do back channel data.
And the way we've implemented it is
as a non-blocking pipe between the
back channel and the filters upstream.
There's two functions to
actually access this information.
Back channel read reads the data from
the back end into the driver or filter,
and back channel write writes it from
the back end to the driver or filter.
There's a timeout in
there so you can say,
"If I don't get a response
back within one second,
then this printer doesn't
support back channel data,
so I'll use the unidirectional
mode of my driver."
If you're doing anything with
PostScript or JCL options
in your own drivers,
there's a PPD emit JCL end which
handles any cleanup PGL that needs to
be put out for a particular printer.
And then the emit string which is
a more general purpose function
for actually collecting all of the
options for a particular section and
putting them into a string that then
you can put in memory or send out to
a file or send out to the printer.
And we use this with a new
PostScript filter in CUPS to better
support different page layout options and
get things out to the printer correctly.
If you're doing a raster driver,
we've expanded the amount of information
that's put in the page header,
largely in response to
the Gutenprint folks,
but this will be useful for everybody,
I think.
There's a borderless scaling factor
attribute that's in there that
corresponds to the scaling factor
that was used for a borderless print.
That comes from Tiger and has been
forwarded into the raster format,
so now you don't have to
guess at what value was used.
It's in there.
Similarly,
we've added floating point page
sizes and imageable areas so that
if you have a page size that is
not an integral number of points,
you can actually get the actual
dimensions at a much better resolution.
And if you have letter and letter
full bleed and the sizes are the same,
well, you can get the size name now.
It tells you it's letter
or letter.fullbleed.
There's marker type and rendering
intent string options that you
can control that in your driver.
You're going to be using a
particular set of inks or you're
using a particular rendering model.
That information can be passed
through and would be passed
through from a client as well,
so you don't have to
depend on a PDE for that.
And then there's general purpose integer,
real, and string attributes that
you can use for anything.
In order to support this,
we have three new APIs.
The first one is most useful
if you're doing a RIP.
It's CUPS Raster Interpret PPD.
It takes the commands and stuff that
are in the PPD and the options that
the user specified and generates a
page header from that that you can use.
It also has a callback interface
so that if the user is asking for
something that the RIP doesn't support,
you can say hey, wait a minute,
I need to fix this.
And the Interpret PPD function then
handles that situation for you.
The Raster Read Header 2 and Raster
Write Header 2 functions do the new
CUPS Raster format header so that you
get all of the extended page attributes.
If you don't use these, the old APIs,
Read Header and Write Header,
automatically handle expanding and
dropping the data that you don't need.
Something new in CUPS 1.2 is
the port monitor interface.
Previously, you'd have generic filters,
then a print driver filter,
and then talk directly to the back end.
And if you wanted anything
special to happen between
that driver and the back end,
you had to write a new back end.
Now we have a port monitor interface
that sticks between the driver and
the back end so that if you need to
do any special protocol conversions
such as TBCP or BCP or 1284 packet
encoding or anything of that nature,
you can put it there.
I also recommend if any of your users
do any kind of raw printing that you
use this to do printer accounting,
ink monitoring, that sort of thing,
there rather than in the
driver because it will give
you a better user experience.
In order to support different port
monitors for different interfaces,
we have a new attribute
you can specify in the PPD,
CUPS Port Monitor,
and basically in this example here,
you can say when I'm talking
via socket connection,
I need to use TBCP because it
isn't an 8-bit clean channel,
but when I'm going via USB,
I don't need anything.
And we have TBCP and
BCP port monitors in CUPS.
When you're running as a back-end,
previously you always
ran as the root user.
We've changed that in 1.2.
It's probably the only incompatible
change from a program standpoint.
Basically, if the back-end has
world execute privileges,
it gets run as LP.
If it doesn't, it gets run as root.
So if you're shipping a driver right now
or back-end that needs to run as root,
just change the driver to
have mode 700 in your package,
and that will work for
both tiger and leopard.
[Transcript missing]
The backends,
when you're advertising your device,
you can now include the 1284
device ID in your advertisement.
This allows for better
automatic driver selection.
We know that if a printer
has a certain device ID,
it corresponds to this
exact driver on the system.
So I encourage you,
if you're doing your own backends,
add support for that if you can.
All of the standard
CUPS backends do that now.
And instead of getting a static
snapshot of what the devices were
when you booted the system or
when you first requested the list,
we now run the backends every time
somebody asks for a list of devices.
So in the web interface,
you go to the admin page,
ask for the devices.
You go to add a printer
in your printer browser,
it asks for devices.
So keep in mind that your backend
might be run more frequently in
the discovery mode than originally.
Because we don't keep track of the
devices that are available on the
system beyond when somebody asks for it,
we now only validate that the URI is
compliant with the corresponding RFCs and
the scheme is registered as a backend.
So keep in mind that your back end
might be run more frequently in
the discovery mode than originally.
Because we don't keep track of the
devices that are available on the
system beyond when somebody asks for it,
we now only validate that the URI is
compliant with the corresponding RFCs.
And the scheme is
registered as a back end.
So you can't use this to
dynamically control what options
are available all the time.
But it can give you a snapshot
when you first add the device.
If you're going to update your PPD,
you can do that from your port monitor,
your back end, or your driver,
and enable certain options.
It's got the duplexer now,
or it doesn't have the duplexer,
and that sort of thing.
What we're going to use it for
in the Gutenprint drivers is
to provide virtual drivers.
And basically,
the Gutenprint drivers are capable of
generating their own PPD files already.
We've been doing that for many years now.
But generating static files
that can then be distributed,
now we'll be able to do a
driver interface that lists
all the drivers in there,
and then just provide the one
that you're actually going to use.
So it'll save 50,000 files and many
megabytes of disk space that way.
You can also use it for grabbing
PPD files over the network,
doing all sorts of dynamic stuff.
It's a very general purpose interface.
And we look forward to seeing
what people do with it.
There's a helper program
called CUPS Driver D.
You'll see whenever somebody's asking
for the list of PPDs on the system.
And it's now responsible for
handling the PPD database that used
to be managed by the scheduler.
So you'll notice that things moved
around a little bit that way.
So for CUPS 1.3,
which is the next major release,
that's where we're going to
get Kerberos support in there.
It's scheduled for release in October.
So I know I say sometimes we're
going to have a release out in
a few weeks or a few months.
We've actually changed our whole
development process from the lessons
we learned in 1.2 to say we're
not going to try to lump in 90
new features into a minor release.
We're going to do one or two,
and maybe a few of the little ones there.
But we get them out more frequently,
and there's less code churn between them.
So as you're upgrading,
you're not going to notice sudden
huge changes that are going to
completely disrupt your lives.
So we're going to get
the 1.3 out in October,
and we'll have the Kerberos support.
There's actually one of the Samba
developers that's doing it as a
Google Summer of Code project for us,
and he did Kerberos support in Samba.
So we're very confident that's
going to come off very well,
and that you can actually
look at his progress.
So we're going to have the 1.3
version of Kerberos support in
the CUPS Subversion Repository.
So we want to get your involvement.
We have a web page that handles the bug
reports and feature requests for CUPS,
and there's a roadmap page there.
So if you're at all interested
in shaping the future of CUPS,
please go to our site.
Please provide your feedback.
If you're running into problems,
feel free to file bug reports with us.
If it's something that's
really Apple-specific,
definitely file it with them.
But we're interested in
knowing about problems as well.
And we can just keep working like
we have been for the last four
years and make CUPS even better.
If you're familiar with the
CUPS book that's currently out,
it's got a big squid on the
front and there were some various
allusions in that to printing.
We're coming out with a new CUPS book,
something that we're publishing,
and no more squids.
Just nice clean cover
with the CUPS mascot.
It's going to cover all of the
new stuff in 1.2 and beyond.
It's also going to cover the CUPSDDK,
ESP Go script, Gutenprint and so forth.
And we've organized it
differently so that it's more
about I want to get this done,
so here's the steps to get that done
and then here's why these steps work.
So it's a much more effective, I think,
manual for learning how to use
CUPS than the previous book.
That's also available in October.
CUPS resources, you have the website,
the forms and mailing
lists are available there.
The CUPS books are available there.
The feature request page is there
and the source code is there.
So you can go and
download the source code,
download the universal package for
Mac OS X Tiger and just have fun.
If you're doing something
for Mac OS X specifically,
there's the Apple bug reporting page.
Make use of it when you find a bug.
We can't fix bugs we don't know about.
And the printing list,
if you have questions,
especially if you're developing software,
this list is great.
I'm there and a lot of the
Apple developers are there helping out,
answering questions about the
printing system and how to do things.
And finally,
the open source printing page,
that's where you get the actual copy of
this CUPS source code that's included
with a particular Mac OS X release.
And if you want to rebuild it
yourself and play around with it,
start there because there are differences
between the standard CUPS software
and CUPS.org and what Apple provides.
Mainly, as we're syncing things up,
they're a little bit
further ahead than we are.
As a developer,
there's online documentation now.
All the APIs are documented with
online help on the web interface,
so bookmark that.
And we have a driver developer kit.
If you're writing a
printer driver for CUPS,
this is what you should be using,
whether you're using it for
your actual printer driver or
just generating the PPD files.
We have utilities now to actually merge
multiple single-language PPD files
into a single multi-language PPD file.
So if you're even not going to
use the PPD compiler in the DDK,
but you want to do stuff and
support Mac OS X more quickly,
use this utility.
It'll save you a whole bunch of time,
and you can move on to
more exciting things.
There's standard drivers for
PCL and Epson printers in the DDK.
If you have a multifunction
device that just uses one
of those standard languages,
you can use those drivers freely.
They're GPLed.
And support them without
a whole lot of trouble.
Without a whole lot of work,
you just have to write a
little device description file,
and it'll create a PPD for you,
and you'll be up and printing.
For us, it takes the driver development
time from months to a few days.